---
title: "The Influential Work of Edgar Allen Poe"
date: 2019-04-02T23:19:12+11:00
draft: false
author: "Thomas Waddingham"
categories: ["post","articles","horror"]
images: ["img/gabriel-717050-unsplash.jpg"]
image: "img/gabriel-717050-unsplash.jpg"
---
# Introduction

Readers of modern horror fiction will undoubtedly eventually come into contact with work
from Edgar Allen Poe. His works after all have been cited by Stephen King, Jules Verne and
many other writers drawing from the era of Gothic Romanticism. Poe is even credited with
popularising the short story, he himself arguing that the short story was superior to the
novel for the reason that there is a limit on art of the length of one sitting. Despite having
created such a wide range of influential works, there are stories which stand out from the
rest, stories which any fan of horror or thriller should read.

## The Black Cat

The Black Cat is a story of guilt and insanity. The narrator and the titular animal have an
increasingly complicated relationship, one which in true Gothic fashion can only end in
death. Detailing human fault and sin in conjunction with the highly superstitious imagery of
the black cat creates one of Poe’s darker tales. A highly influential story of moral
condemnation that Poe uses to communicate several key statements about his own beliefs
about people and their abuses.

## The Fall of House Usher

This story of Gothic horror is also combined with classic detective fiction to further draw us
into the writing. Describing the story of comforting a friend in the distant countryside, Poe
demonstrates his forward, futuristic thinking by delving into topics such as psychology and
metaphysics, despite the modern versions of these being over half a century away from
being compiled. The Fall of House Usher is an entertaining mystery that uses tension and
anticipation to permeate fear as opposed to the ghoulish monsters often generated by the
contemporary works of horror. The story’s influence extends to the modern day as many
later horror writers such as H.P. Lovecraft drew upon metaphysical horror stories like these
when writing their own works.

## The Balloon Hoax

While not technically a story, The Balloon Hoax is instead an entirely fictional news article
that Poe had published in a local newspaper. The story to the modern reader seems
ridiculous; the equivalent of a hot air balloon crossing the Atlantic Ocean in less than three
days, a feat which wouldn’t be possible until exactly 100 years later. At the time, it captured
the attention of New York, sending people into a flurry of excitement as they read about the
extraordinary and dangerous, yet fictional, accomplishment. This story’s legacy is the
continuing tradition of hoaxes to present stories, especially in the genre of Sci-fi where its
encouraged the success of hoaxes such as the radio broadcast of War of the Worlds.

## The Masque of the Red Death

A traditional gothic horror story, The Masque of the Red Death contains layers of symbolism
and allegory. Set in an abbey during a masquerade ball while the Red Death (a plague)
ravages the countryside, the story is akin to the Fall of House Usher in how it uses tension
and anticipation to build suspense. The ultimate reveal of the thing behind the mask is the
horror and release of the suspense, delivering a sense of catharsis to the audience as the
story reaches its inevitable conclusion. Modern horror stories also often feature this
catharsis, recognising it as an important characteristic of the genre where justice is finally
done.

## The Tell-Tale Heart

The Tell-Tale heart is Poe’s most widely known story, garnering its reputation for its mastery
over plot, suspense and written style. The narrator of the story is both insane yet calculated,
the horrific acts of the story are described in gruesome glory and the pace of the story is
controlled by the varying sentence structures and length to ensure a rapid pace mirroring
the most intense moments. The story has influenced a wide variety of captivated writers as
they analyse its depth, debating the themes of guilt and insanity eloquently displayed by the
story.

## Conclusion

Edgar Allen Poe revolutionised several genres of books with his works. His most influential
tales are those that are experimental and predicative, the ones that push the boundaries of
Gothic horror and the ones which delve into deep allegory of the human mind’s guilt, sanity
and abuse.